

Non-destructive imaging methods that preserve tissue integrity support insight on topography and co-localization of proteins and structures, which are critical in studies of neurodegenerative diseases. Such studies involve different cell populations with a gradient of vulnerability and changes that can be detected and quantified thanks to immunostaining methods that enable in situ detection of specific targets [1]. In order to create protocols for multiplex localization of neurodegenerative-related processes, for example, involved in Alzheimer's Disease (AD), one of the approaches is to use fluorescent staining of post-mortem tissue to access neuron populations. Cell quantification is a crucial task as it allows for the neuro-positive detection in the subject’s tissue. While being a broadly used  approach, manual cell counting is time-consuming and prone to subjectivity, despite requiring a high-level of expertise. For these reasons, manual cell counting is viewed as a bottleneck to the scientific investigation of the pathophysiology of AD necessary for drug development. There is evidence of previous efforts to automatically segment images containing neurons, but the methods presented in [2] and [3] work with fluorescent images derived from experimental animals. In this project we create a convolutional neural network based on U-Net as part of an automated pipeline to segment neurons from neuron positive fluorescent images based on markers. The data consists of post-mortem tissue from 2 specimens acquired from Dr. Grinberg’s lab at UCSF. The specimens were imaged using a Zeiss AxioScan slider; each underwent multiplex immunofluorescent staining using antibodies against TBR1, a marker for excitatory neurons, and RORB, a developmental driver of neuronal subtype specification. From these specimens, we constructed a data collection with 512 images split 50/50 for the training/testing of our model, each of these with dimensions of 128x128 pixels. The U-Net-based network is composed of 12 layers, and constructed with TensorFlow through Keras. On average, the resulting model yields a sensitivity of 0.74, a specificity of 0.98, and accuracy of 0.98 in automated cell counting. These experiments are encouraging given the complexity of the input images, as neurons vary in shapes and sizes, and respective curated masks present limitations. Our future efforts include the testing of larger datasets, the complete automation of neuron segmentations from input to output, and training of other CNN models. 
[1] A.J. Ehrenberg et al. A manual multiplex immunofluorescence method for investigating neurodegenerative diseases. Elsevier, 2020. 
[2] Iqbal A., et al. DeNeRD: high-throughput detection of neurons for brain-wide analysis in deep learning. Nature, 2019.
[3] Soltanian-Zadeh S., et al. Fast and robust active neuron segmentation in two-photon calcium imaging using spatiotemporal deep learning. PNAS, 2019.
