Title: Toward lung screening for COVID19 using chest X-ray and deep learning

Across the world during the pandemic, radiologists and hospital doctors have been using CT and chest X-ray (CXR) scans for screening patients suspected of infection by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Tomographic 3D images taken from different angles around the body carries better spatial location to characterize people showing ground glass opacities, consolidations, and other radiological findings associated with the disease. However, CTs are seldom available in remote areas in the US as well as developing countries, and that is when CXR becomes an alternative. While CT and CXR scans do capture abnormalities on the lungs of COVID-19 patients, many other infections look very similar, and doctors worry that this may lead to false-positive and false-negative diagnoses. The goal of this study is to investigate lung geometry and density variations due to tissue and fluid alterations due to COVID-19. In order to do so, we constructed neural networks (NN) as the key image processing to solve a segmentation problem: detect both lungs. Identification of these particular areas of interest automatically presents several challenges due to the occlusion of lung regions by medical equipment and other artifacts that appearly routinely in CTs and CXRs. The python-based algorithms explore public datasets as input to U-Net models, a convolutional NN architecture regulated by 2 main parameters, which influence performance: the number of downscaling (and subsequent upscaling) operations and the number of channels per feature map. Preliminary segmentation results show that the Dice score reached up to 0.946 using a 5-fold cross validation on two different datasets, (ieee8023 and NIH) [1,2]. Additionally, we noticed a high level of transferability across different datasets, for example, a network trained on the NIH data-set presented an average Dice score of 0.898 on the ieee8023 data set. Future work will evaluate the ability of NNs to detect COVID-19 in CXR scans. Some NNs take in full CXR images as input, but we believe that first segmenting the relevant lung regions in the images before feeding the data into a classifier will improve COVID-19 detection. To evaluate this method, we will run two separate analyses. We will first evaluate the training/test performance of several  neural network classifiers on the labeled raw CXR data. We will then repeat this evaluation on the segmented CXR data. We expect that the networks using lung area only will result in higher accuracy metric scores compared to networks that take in raw data. Class activation maps are a weak localization method that can highlight which regions of the input image are most important to the output prediction. This component can potentially guide users to abnormalities and anomalies in the lung CXR’s without the need of human labeling of these regions.
https://github.com/ieee8023/covid-chestxray-dataset/tree/master/images
https://nihcc.app.box.com/s/r8kf5xcthjvvvf6r7l1an99e1nj4080m
